that's supposed to remind us to be thankful.”

“You may be right about all all of that, my Son.”

“Tell me about a time Jesus wants us to be thankful, Daddy.”
"Tell me about a time Jesus wants us to be thankful, Daddy.”

“Uh, well... Do you remember the story the story about the ten lepers who wanted Jesus to heal them of the spots on their skin?”

“Sure. He told them what to do and they were fixed but only one came back to say 'Thank you'.”

“You know the story very well. Jesus reminds us to be thankful everyday for all the blessings blessings He gives us. What would happen if God only gave us tomorrow what we thanked Him for today? Soon we wouldn't have food or clothing or sunshine or rain or a roof over our heads or people we love or anything! We need to be reminded to be grateful. We need to be reminded to be grateful.”

Just then Nora stuck her head in the door. “Just reminding you to get ready. It's time to get on the road.”

“Let's say 'thank you' for Mommy. We want her to be here tomorrow.”

“Great idea, Son.”

“Dear Father in heaven. We thank you for providing our daily needs, all we remember to thank you for and all those we forget to mention; all the loving people in our lives, especially the women working working so hard to bring us this special feast on this special day. Be with all the people that need extra blessings that they, too, can know your love. Thank you for sending sending Jesus to teach us and save us. In His name we pray. Amen”

“And thank you for taking taking the leopard's spots.” Carlson added.
“And thank you for taking the leopard's spots.” Carlson added.

The Merriweather/Koolridge family and guests gathered in the large Victorian home where they finally settled at the dining table graced with a brown roasted roasted turkey including all the trimmings ready to give thanks.

“Maybe our new friend, Darwin, would like to honor us by saying the blessing?” Russell suggested trying to include the outsider.

“I wouldn't know how to begin, Sir. Please let someone else.”
“I wouldn't know how to begin, Sir. Please let someone else.”

“At my family gatherings gatherings I was always the one to lead the prayer.” Stated Mr. Grant.

“That would be nice.” Nana agreed.

“I want to, I want to!” Carlson suddenly piped up.

“The food is cooling. I think we better cool the argument and get started.” Chrissy hinted.

“We could each each say for what we are thankful.” Douglas Douglas pushed onward.

Nora interjected. “Okay! I I know the perfect argument settler. Where's the wishbone,Nana Nana?”