History
Approximately forty-eight years prior to the Endurance launch, an unidentified gravitational anomaly appeared near the orbit of Saturn; it was found to be a Wormhole.

About ten years prior to the Endurance launch, NASA sent twelve men and women through the wormhole in search of habitable planets for human resettlement, led by Dr. Mann.

It is approximately a two year journey for NASA capsules to reach Saturn from Earth via a slingshot around Mars. TARS elaborates that it would take eight months to reach Mars then fourteen months to Saturn. In that time, the robot assigned to the mission (one each in the case of Lazarus, two in the case of Endurance) maintains all functions of the craft while the crew are put into cryogenic sleep to conserve resources. The crew is revived before venturing through the wormhole.

During the 22nd century, Cooper Station was in orbit of the planet for ease of access for Ranger crews to traverse the wormhole.
Symbolism
Endurance Saturn
Endurance glides past Saturn on its way toward the wormhole

Saturn is the Roman god of the harvest and visually impressive; it makes sense for the wormhole to be there thematically.
As possible homage, Saturn's orbit is where the Monolith was in 2001: A Space Odyssey as well (in the book only; in the movie it was Jupiter).
Saturn's rings also mimic the shape of the accretion disk around Gargantua.
Interstellar is a 2014 epic science fiction film directed by Christopher Nolan, who co-wrote the screenplay with his brother Jonathan. It stars Matthew McConaughey, Anne Hathaway, Jessica Chastain, Bill Irwin, Ellen Burstyn, and Michael Caine. Set in a dystopian future where Earth is suffering from catastrophic blight and famine, the film follows a group of astronauts who travel through a wormhole near Saturn in search of a new home for mankind.

The screenplay had its origins in a script Jonathan developed in 2007 and was originally set to be directed by Steven Spielberg. Theoretical physicist Kip Thorne was an executive producer and scientific consultant on the film, and wrote the tie-in book The Science of Interstellar. It was Lynda Obst's final film as producer before her death. Cinematographer Hoyte van Hoytema shot it on 35 mm film in the Panavision anamorphic format and IMAX 70 mm. Filming began in late 2013 and took place in Alberta, Klaustur, and Los Angeles. Interstellar uses extensive practical and miniature effects, and the company DNEG created additional digital effects.

Interstellar was released in theaters on November 7, 2014. In the United States, it was first released on film stock, expanding to venues using digital projectors. The film received generally positive reviews and grossed $681 million worldwide during its initial theatrical run, making it the tenth-highest-grossing film of 2014. Among its various accolades, Interstellar was nominated for five awards at the 87th Academy Awards, winning Best Visual Effects.